[SYCL] Add specialization constant feature design doc. (#2572)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/SpecializationConstants.md

# Specialization constants

DPC++ implements the [proposal](https://github.com/codeplaysoftware/standards-proposals/blob/master/spec-constant/index.md)

> by Codeplay with some restrictions. See this [document](https://github.com/intel/llvm/pull/2503) for more details.

Reviewer: Please update this link to doc merged location (instead of pull request)

> #### Requirements:
> - must work with separate compilation and linking

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Requirements:

- must work with separate compilation and linking
```

- must support AOT compilation

> Implementaion is based on SPIRV specialization constants. But there is one

Reviewer: SPIR-V everywhere pls.

important difference between SYCL and SPIRV: in SYCL speciazation constants are
identified by a type ID which is mapped to a symbolic name, in SPIRV - by an
ordinal number. This complicates the design, as the compiler
1) needs to propagate symbolic =\> numeric ID correspondence to the runtime
2) can assign numeric IDs only when linking due to the separate compilation

Simple source code example:

```cpp
class MyInt32Const;
...
  sycl::program p(q.get_context());
  sycl::ONEAPI::experimental::spec_constant<int32_t, MyInt32Const> i32 =
      p.set_spec_constant<MyInt32Const>(rt_val);
  p.build_with_kernel_type<MyKernel>();
  sycl::buffer<int, 1> buf(vec.data(), vec.size());

  q.submit([&](cl::sycl::handler &cgh) {
    auto acc = buf.get_access<cl::sycl::access::mode::write>(cgh);
    cgh.single_task<MyKernel>(
        p.get_kernel<MyKernel>(),
        [=]() {
          acc[0] = i32.get();
        });
  });
...
```

## Design

This section describes the basic design used to support spec constants of
primitive numeric types. POD types support is described further in the document.

> #### Compiler
> Key `spec_constant::get()` function implementation for the device code:
> ```cpp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Compiler

Key `spec_constant::get()` function implementation for the device code:

```cpp
```

template <typename T, typename ID = T> class spec_constant {
...
public:
  T get() const { // explicit access.
#ifdef __SYCL_DEVICE_ONLY__
    const char *TName = __builtin_unique_stable_name(ID);
    return __sycl_getSpecConstantValue<T>(TName);
#else
    return Val;
#endif // __SYCL_DEVICE_ONLY__
  }

> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```

```

> here `__builtin_unique_stable_name` is a compiler built-in used to translate

Reviewer: please add empty line after code section

- collects and provides \<Symbolic ID\> =\> \<numeric ID\> spec constant information
  to the sycl-post-link tool
Particularly, it translates intrinsic calls to the
`T __sycl_getSpecConstantValue*(const char *symbolic_id)` intrinsic into
calls to `T __spirv_SpecConstant(int ID, T default_val)` intrinsic known to
the llvm-spirv translator. Where `ID` is the numeric ID of the corresponding
spec constant, `default_val` is its default value which will be used if the
constant is not set at the runtime.

After this pass the sycl-post-link tool will output the
\<Symbolic ID\> =\> \<numeric ID\> spec constant mapping into a file for later
attaching this info to the device binary image via the offload wrapper tool as
a property set:

```cpp
struct pi_device_binary_struct {
...
  // Array of preperty sets; e.g. specialization constants symbol-int ID map is
  // propagated to runtime with this mechanism.
  pi_device_binary_property_set PropertySetsBegin;
  pi_device_binary_property_set PropertySetsEnd;
};
```

SYCL runtime can then load and access info about particular spec constant using
its name as a key into the appropriate property set (named "SYCL/specialization
constants").

> ##### Ahead of time compilation
> With AOT everything is simplified - the `SpecConstants` pass simply replaces

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Ahead of time compilation

With AOT everything is simplified - the `SpecConstants` pass simply replaces
```

the `__sycl_getSpecConstantValue` calls with constants - default values of
the spec constant's type. No maps are generated, and SYCL program can't change
the value of a spec constant.

#### LLVMIR-SPIRV translator

Given the `__spirv_SpecConstant` intrinsic calls produced by the
`SpecConstants` pass:
```cpp
; Function Attrs: alwaysinline
define dso_local spir_func i32 @get() local_unnamed_addr #0 {
  ; args are "ID" and "default value":
  %1 = tail call spir_func i32 @_Z20__spirv_SpecConstantii(i32 42, i32 0)
  ret i32 %1
}
```

> the translator will generate `OpSpecConstant` SPIRV instructions with proper

Reviewer: empty line after code

> `SpecId` decorations:
> ```cpp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`SpecId` decorations:

```cpp
```

              OpDecorate %i32 SpecId 42 ; ID
       %i32 = OpSpecConstant %int 0     ; Default value
         %1 = OpTypeFunction %int

       %get = OpFunction %int None %1
         %2 = OpLabel
              OpReturnValue %i32
              OpFunctionEnd
```

#### SYCL runtime

For each device binary compiler generates a map \<Symbolic ID\> =\> \<numeric ID\>
("ID map"). The SYCL runtime imports that map when loading device binaries.
It also maintains another map \<Spec const symbolic ID\> =\> \<its value\> 
("value map") per `sycl::program` object. The value map is updated upon
`program::set_spec_constant<IDType>(val)` calls from the app.

> ***NOTE**: `IDType` gets translated to the symbolic ID using the integration
> header mechanism, similarly to kernel ID type. The reason why
> `__builtin_unique_stable_name` is not used here is because this code is
> compiled by the host compiler, which can be any C++ 14-compatible compiler
> unaware of the clang-specific built-ins.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**_NOTE_**  `IDType` gets translated to the symbolic ID using the integration
header mechanism, similarly to kernel ID type. The reason why
`__builtin_unique_stable_name` is not used here is because this code is
compiled by the host compiler, which can be any C++ 14-compatible compiler
unaware of the clang-specific built-ins.
```

This should have nicer visualization of the note

Before JIT-ing a program, the runtime "flushes" the spec constants: it iterates

> through the value map and invokes the
> ```cpp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
through the value map and invokes the

```cpp
```

pi_result piextProgramSetSpecializationConstant(pi_program prog,
                                                pi_uint32 spec_id,
                                                size_t spec_size,
                                                const void *spec_value);
```

Plugin Interface function for each entry, taking the `spec_id` from the ID map.

## "Plain Old Data" (POD) types support design

#### Source representation

> Say, the POD type is
> ```cpp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Say, the POD type is

```cpp
```

struct A {
  int x;
  float y;
};

struct POD {
  A a[2];
  int b;
};

> ```

Reviewer: blank line after code section

> and the user says
> ```cpp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the user says

```cpp
```

  POD gold{
    {
      { goldi, goldf },
      { goldi + 1, goldf + 1 },
    },
    goldi
  };

  cl::sycl::ONEAPI::experimental::spec_constant<POD, MyConst> sc =  program4.set_spec_constant<MyConst>(gold);

> ```

Reviewer: blank line after code section

Reviewer 2: `goldi` and `goldf` are note defined in this example. Their type is not clear. Please clarify.

> #### Compiler
> ##### The SpecConstant pass changes
>  - The SpecConstants pass in the post-link will have the following IR as input (`sret` conversion is omitted for clarity):
> ```cpp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Compiler

##### The SpecConstant pass changes

 - The SpecConstants pass in the post-link will have the following IR as input (`sret` conversion is omitted for clarity):

```cpp
```

  %spec_const = call %struct.POD __sycl_getCompositeSpecConstantValue<mangling for POD type template specialization ("MyConst_mangled")

> ```

Reviewer: blank line after code here and below....

unaware of the clang-specific built-ins.

Before JIT-ing a program, the runtime "flushes" the spec constants: it iterates
through the value map and invokes the

```cpp
pi_result piextProgramSetSpecializationConstant(pi_program prog,
                                                pi_uint32 spec_id,
                                                size_t spec_size,
                                                const void *spec_value);
```

Plugin Interface function for each entry, taking the `spec_id` from the ID map.

## "Plain Old Data" (POD) types support design

#### Source representation

Say, the POD type is

```cpp
struct A {
  int x;
  float y;
};

struct POD {
  A a[2];
  int b;
};
```

and the user says

```cpp
  POD gold{
    {
      { goldi, goldf },
      { goldi + 1, goldf + 1 },
    },
    goldi
  };

  cl::sycl::ONEAPI::experimental::spec_constant<POD, MyConst> sc =  program4.set_spec_constant<MyConst>(gold);
```

#### Compiler

##### The SpecConstant pass changes

 - The SpecConstants pass in the post-link will have the following IR as input (`sret` conversion is omitted for clarity):

```cpp

>   %spec_const = call %struct.POD __sycl_getCompositeSpecConstantValue<mangling for POD type template specialization ("MyConst_mangled")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  %spec_const = call %struct.POD __sycl_getCompositeSpecConstantValue<mangling for POD type template specialization> ("MyConst_mangled")
```

Author: this  just a pseudo-code to illustrate the idea

```

where `__sycl_getCompositeSpecConstantValue` is a new "intrinsic"
 (in addition to `__sycl_getSpecConstantValue`) recognized by SpecConstants pass,
 which creates a value of a composite (of non-primitive type) specialization constant.
 It does not need a default value, because its default value consists of default
 valued of its leaf specialization constants (see below).

>  - after spec constant enumeration (symbolic -\> int ID translation), the SC pass

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 - after spec constant enumeration (symbolic -\> int ID translation), the SpecConstants pass
```

>  will handle the `__sycl_getCompositeSpecConstantValue`. Knowning the composite

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 will handle the `__sycl_getCompositeSpecConstantValue`. Given the knowledge of the composite
```

 specialization constant's type (`%struct.POD`), the pass will traverse its leaf
 fields and generate 5 "primitive" spec constants using already existing SPIR-V intrinsic:

```cpp
%gold_POD_a0x = call i32 __spirv_SpecConstant(i32 10, i32 0)
%gold_POD_a0y = call float __spirv_SpecConstant(i32 11, float 0)
%gold_POD_a1x = call i32 __spirv_SpecConstant(i32 12, i32 0)
%gold_POD_a1y = call float __spirv_SpecConstant(i32 13, float 0)
%gold_POD_b = call i32 __spirv_SpecConstant(i32 14, i32 0)
```

And 1 "composite"

```cpp

>   %gold_POD = call %struct.POD __spirvCompositeSpecConstant<POD mangling>(10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  %gold_POD = call %struct.POD __spirvCompositeSpecConstant<POD mangling>(i32 10, i32 11, i32 12, i32 13, i32 14, i32 15)
```

```

> where `__spirvCompositeSpecConstant<type mangling>` is a new SPIR-V intrinsic which

Reviewer 2: There are at least 3 different ways to denote mangling of the POD type <in angle brackets> in this document. I believe they all mean the same thing, can we have single representation for it?

Author: OK

 represents creation of a composite specialization constant. Its arguments are spec
 constant IDs corresponding to the leaf fields of the POD type of the constant.

>  ID is not needed, as runtime will never use it - it will use IDs of the leaves instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Spec ID for the composite spec constant is not needed, as runtime will never use it - it will use IDs of the leaves instead.
```

no ID map entry within the meta information, and the composite constant will
referenced by its symbolic ID. For example:

```cpp
MyConst_mangled [10,int,0,4],[10,float,4,4],[10,int,8,4],[10,float,12,4],[10,int,16,4]
```

#### LLVMIR-\>SPIR-V translator

The translator aims to create the following code (pseudo-code)

```cpp
%gold_POD_a0x = OpSpecConstant(0)    [SpecId = 10]
%gold_POD_a0y = OpSpecConstant(0.0f) [SpecId = 11]
%gold_POD_a1x = OpSpecConstant(0)    [SpecId = 12]
%gold_POD_a1y = OpSpecConstant(0.0f) [SpecId = 13]
%gold_POD_b   = OpSpecConstant(0)    [SpecId = 14]

%gold_POD_a0 = OpSpecConstantComposite(
  %gold_POD_a0x // gold.a[0].x
  %gold_POD_a0y // gold.a[0].y
)

%gold_POD_a1 = OpSpecConstantComposite(
  %gold_POD_a1x // gold.a[1].x
  %gold_POD_a1y // gold.a[1].y
)

%gold_POD = OpSpecConstantComposite(
  %gold_POD_a0,
  %gold_POD_a1,
  %gold_POD_b   // gold.b
}
```

 - `OpSpecConstant` operations will be created using already existing mechanism for
 the primitive spec constants.
 - Then the translator will handle `__spirvCompositeSpecConstant*` intrinsic. It will
 recursively traverse the spec constant type structure in parallel with the argument

>  list - which is a list of primitive spec constant operation IDs (not their SpecIds!).

Reviewer 2: I'm a bit confused. What is the argument list? Is it the argument list of `__spirvCompositeSpecConstant*`? But the example above says that it is a list of SpecId indeed. Having SpecIds here looks logical to me.

Author: good catch - will change. It should be SpecIDs of course

Author: It is the SPIRV OpSpecConstantComposite operation, where arguments (operands) are spec constant result IDs rather than SpecIDs

the llvm-spirv translator. Where `ID` is the numeric ID of the corresponding
spec constant, `default_val` is its default value which will be used if the
constant is not set at the runtime.

After this pass the sycl-post-link tool will output the
\<Symbolic ID\> =\> \<numeric ID\> spec constant mapping into a file for later
attaching this info to the device binary image via the offload wrapper tool as
a property set:

```cpp
struct pi_device_binary_struct {
...
  // Array of preperty sets; e.g. specialization constants symbol-int ID map is
  // propagated to runtime with this mechanism.
  pi_device_binary_property_set PropertySetsBegin;
  pi_device_binary_property_set PropertySetsEnd;
};
```

SYCL runtime can then load and access info about particular spec constant using
its name as a key into the appropriate property set (named "SYCL/specialization
constants").

##### Ahead of time compilation

With AOT everything is simplified - the `SpecConstants` pass simply replaces
the `__sycl_getSpecConstantValue` calls with constants - default values of
the spec constant's type. No maps are generated, and SYCL program can't change

> the value of a spec constant.

Reviewer 2: I think it makes sense to mention what happens if we try to change value of the spec constant in AOT mode. I guess an exception is thrown in this case, right?

Author: Yes. But this is spec, I don't think we need to duplicate it here.

  %spec_const = call %struct.POD __sycl_getCompositeSpecConstantValue<POD type mangling> ("MyConst_mangled")
```

where `__sycl_getCompositeSpecConstantValue` is a new "intrinsic"
 (in addition to `__sycl_getSpecConstantValue`) recognized by SpecConstants pass,
 which creates a value of a composite (of non-primitive type) specialization constant.
 It does not need a default value, because its default value consists of default
 valued of its leaf specialization constants (see below).

 - after spec constant enumeration (symbolic -\> int ID translation), the SpecConstants pass
 will handle the `__sycl_getCompositeSpecConstantValue`. Given the knowledge of the composite
 specialization constant's type (`%struct.POD`), the pass will traverse its leaf
 fields and generate 5 "primitive" spec constants using already existing SPIR-V intrinsic:

```cpp
%gold_POD_a0x = call i32 __spirv_SpecConstant(i32 10, i32 0)
%gold_POD_a0y = call float __spirv_SpecConstant(i32 11, float 0)
%gold_POD_a1x = call i32 __spirv_SpecConstant(i32 12, i32 0)
%gold_POD_a1y = call float __spirv_SpecConstant(i32 13, float 0)
%gold_POD_b = call i32 __spirv_SpecConstant(i32 14, i32 0)
```

And 1 "composite"

```cpp

>   %gold_POD = call %struct.POD __spirvCompositeSpecConstant<POD type mangling>(i32 10, i32 11, i32 12, i32 13, i32 14, i32 15)

Reviewer 2: What is `15` here?

Author: a typo, will remove

>   %gold_POD = call %struct.POD __spirvCompositeSpecConstant<POD type mangling>(i32 10, i32 11, i32 12, i32 13, i32 14, i32 15)

Author: ```suggestion
  %gold_POD = call %struct.POD __spirvCompositeSpecConstant<POD type mangling>(i32 10, i32 11, i32 12, i32 13, i32 14)
```

```

where `__spirvCompositeSpecConstant<POD type mangling>` is a new SPIR-V intrinsic which
 represents creation of a composite specialization constant. Its arguments are spec
 constant IDs corresponding to the leaf fields of the POD type of the constant.
Spec ID for the composite spec constant is not needed, as runtime will never use it - it will use IDs of the leaves instead.

>  Yet SPIR-V does not allow IDs for composite spec constants.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 Yet, the SPIR-V specification does not allow `SpecID` decoration for composite spec constants.
```

##### The post-link tool changes

For composite specialization constants the post link tool will additionally
generate linearized list of \<leaf spec ID,type,offset,size\> tuples (descriptors),
where each tuple describes a leaf field, and store it together with the
existing meta-information associated with the specialization constants and

> passed to the runtime. Also, for a composite specialization constant the will be
> no ID map entry within the meta information, and the composite constant will
> referenced by its symbolic ID. For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
passed to the runtime. Also, for a composite specialization constant there is
no ID map entry within the meta information, and the composite constant is
referenced by its symbolic ID. For example:
```

```cpp

> MyConst_mangled [10,int,0,4],[10,float,4,4],[10,int,8,4],[10,float,12,4],[10,int,16,4]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
MyConst_mangled [10,int,0,4],[11,float,4,4],[12,int,8,4],[13,float,12,4],[14,int,16,4]
```
If I understand it correctly, this is data structure(list) describes the byte array given as an argument to `program4.set_spec_constant<MyConst>(gold)`. If so, I think the type field is redundant here. Having size and offset should be enough to read the value from the byte array.

```

#### LLVMIR-\>SPIR-V translator

The translator aims to create the following code (pseudo-code)

```cpp
%gold_POD_a0x = OpSpecConstant(0)    [SpecId = 10]
%gold_POD_a0y = OpSpecConstant(0.0f) [SpecId = 11]
%gold_POD_a1x = OpSpecConstant(0)    [SpecId = 12]
%gold_POD_a1y = OpSpecConstant(0.0f) [SpecId = 13]
%gold_POD_b   = OpSpecConstant(0)    [SpecId = 14]

%gold_POD_a0 = OpSpecConstantComposite(
  %gold_POD_a0x // gold.a[0].x
  %gold_POD_a0y // gold.a[0].y
)

%gold_POD_a1 = OpSpecConstantComposite(
  %gold_POD_a1x // gold.a[1].x
  %gold_POD_a1y // gold.a[1].y
)

%gold_POD = OpSpecConstantComposite(
  %gold_POD_a0,
  %gold_POD_a1,
  %gold_POD_b   // gold.b
}
```

> - `OpSpecConstant` operations will be created using already existing mechanism for
> the primitive spec constants.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `OpSpecConstant` instructions are created using already existing mechanism for
primitive spec constants.
```
In the SPIR-V spec `OpSpecConstant` referred to as "instruction"

- Then the translator will handle `__spirvCompositeSpecConstant*` intrinsic.
It will recursively traverse the spec constant type structure in parallel with
the argument list - which is a list of primitive spec constant SpecIds.
When traversing, it will create all the intermediate OpSpecConstantComposite

> operations as well as the root one (`%gold_POD`) using simple depth-first tree

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
instructions as well as the root one (`%gold_POD`) using simple depth-first tree
```

traversal with stack. This requires mapping from SpecId decoration number to

> \<id\> of the corresponding OpSpecConstant operation, but this should be pretty

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
\<id\> of the corresponding OpSpecConstant instrution, but this should be pretty
```

straightforward.

#### SYCL runtime

First, when the runtime loads a binary it gets access to specialization

> constant information. So this mapping from a composite spec constant name to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
constant information. So the mapping from a composite spec constant name to
```
